the falling of a thunderbolt awoke me from this craven slumber of the will. my aunt louise was seized with paralysis, towards the end of that sad year 1878, in the month of december. i had come in at night, or rather in the morning, having won a large sum at play. several letters and also a telegram awaited me. i tore open the blue envelope, while i hummed the air of a fashionable song, with a cigarette between my lips, untroubled by an idea that i was about to be apprised of an event which would become, after my father's death and my mother's second marriage, the third great date in my life. the telegram was signed by julie, my former nurse, and it told me that my aunt had been taken ill quite suddenly, also that i must come at once, although there was a hope of her recovery. this bad news was the more terrible to me because i had received a letter from my aunt just a week previously, and in it the dear old lady complained, as usual, that i did not come to see her. my answer to her letter was lying half-written upon my writing-table. i had not finished it; god knows for what futile reason. it needs the advent of that dread visitant, death, to make us understand that we ought to make good haste and love well those whom we do love, if we would not have them pass away from us for ever, before we have loved them enough. bitter remorse, in that i had not proved to her sufficiently how dear she was to me, increased my anxiety about my aunt's state. it was two o'clock a.m., the first train for compiègne did not start until six; in the interval she might die. those were very long hours of waiting, which i killed by turning over in my mind all my shortcomings towards my father's only sister, my sole kinswoman. the possibility of an irrevocable parting made me regard myself as utterly ungrateful! my mental pain grew keener when i was in the train speeding through the cold dawn of a winter's day, along the road i knew so well. as i recognised each familiar feature of the way, i became once more the schoolboy whose heart was full of unuttered tenderness, and whose brain was laden with the weight of a terrible mission. my thoughts outstripped the engine, moving too slowly, to my impatient fancy, which summoned up that beloved face, so frank and so simple, the mouth with its thickish lips and its perfect kindliness, the eyes out of which goodness looked, with their wrinkled, tear-worn lids, the flat bands of grizzled hair. in what state should i find her? perhaps, if on that night of repentance, wretchedness, and mental disturbance, my nerves had not been strained to the utmost--yes, perhaps i should not have experienced those wild impulses when by the side of my aunt's death-bed, which rendered me capable of disobeying the dying woman. but how can i regret my disobedience, since it was the one thing that set me on the track of the truth? no, i do not regret anything, i am better pleased to have done what i have done.