"it took her yesterday," said julie, while the vehicle rumbled heavily through the streets, "but you see it had to happen. our poor demoiselle had been changing for weeks past. she was so trustful, so gentle, so just; she scolded, she ferreted about, she suspected--there, then, her head was all astray. she talked of nothing but thieves and assassins; she thought everybody wanted to do her some harm, the tradespeople, jean, mariette, myself--yes, i too. she went into the cellar every day to count the bottles of wine, and wrote the number down on a paper. the next day she found the same number, and she would maintain the paper was not the same, she disowned her own handwriting. i wanted to tell you this the last time you came here, but i did not venture to say anything; i was afraid it would worry you, and then i thought these were only freaks, that she was a little crazy, and it would pass off. well, then, i came down yesterday to keep her company at her dinner, as she always liked me to do, because, you know, she was fond of me in reality, whether she was ill or well. i could not find her. mariette, jean, and i searched everywhere, and at last jean bethought him of letting the dog loose; the animal brought us straight to the wood-stack, and there we found her lying at full length upon the ground. no doubt she had gone to the stack to count the logs. we lifted her up, our poor dear demoiselle! her mouth was crooked, and one side of her could not move. she began to talk. then we thought she was mad, for she said senseless words which we could not understand; but the doctor assures us that she is perfectly clear in her head, only that she utters one word when she means another. she gets angry if we do not obey her on the instant. last night when i was sitting up with her she asked for some pins, i brought them and she was angry. would you believe that it was the time of night she wanted to know? at length, by dint of questioning her, and by her yeses and noes, which she expresses with her sound hand, i have come to make out her meaning. if you only knew how troubled she was all night about you; i saw it, and when i uttered your name her eyes brightened. she repeats words, you would think she raves; she calls for you. now look here, m. andré, it was the ideas she had about your poor father that brought on her illness. all these last weeks she talked of nothing else. she would say: 'if only they do not kill andré also. as for me, i am old, but he is so young, so good, so gentle.' and she cried--yes, she cried incessantly. 'who is it that you think wants to harm m. andré?' i asked her. then she turned away from me with a look of distrust that cut me to the heart, although i knew that her head was astray. the doctor says that she believes herself persecuted, and that it is a mania; he also says that she may recover, but will never have her speech again."