i listened to julie's talk in silence; i made no answer. i was not surprised that my aunt louise had begun to be attacked by a mental malady, the trials of her life sufficiently explained this, and i could also account for several singularities that i had observed in her attitude towards me of late. she had surprised me much by asking me to bring back a book of my father's which i had never thought of taking away. "return it to me," she said, insisting upon it so strongly, that i instituted a search for the book, and at last unearthed it from the bottom of a cupboard where it had been placed, as if on purpose, under a heap of other books. julie's prolix narrative only enlightened me as to the sad cause of what i had taken for the oddity of a fidgety and lonely old maid. on the other hand, i could not take the ideas of my aunt upon my father's death so philosophically as julie accepted them. what were those ideas? many a time, in the course of conversation with her, i had vaguely felt that she was not opening her heart quite freely to me. her determined opposition to my plans of a personal inquiry might proceed from her piety, which would naturally cause her to disapprove of any thought or project of vengeance, but was there nothing else, nothing besides that piety in question? her strange solicitude for my personal safety, which even led her to entreat me not to go out unarmed in the evening, or get into an empty compartment in a train, with other counsels of the same kind, was no doubt caused by morbid excitement; still her constant and distressing dread might possibly rest upon a less vague foundation than i imagined. i also recalled, with a certain apprehension, that so soon as she ceased to be able completely to control her mind these strange fears took stronger possession of her than before. "what!" said i to myself, "am i becoming like her, that i let such things occur to me? are not these fixed ideas quite natural in a person whose brain is racked by the mania of persecution, and who has lost a beloved brother under circumstances equally mysterious and tragical?"