"but where is this box?" i asked. once more she replied by a sentence of which i could make nothing; and, seeing that she was relapsing into a state of agitation, with the former heart-rending movement, i begged her to allow me to question her and to answer by gestures only. after some minutes, i succeeded in discovering that the box in question was locked up in one of the two large cupboards below stairs, and that the key of the cupboard was on the ring with the others. i went downstairs, leaving her alone, as she had desired me by signs to do. i had no difficulty in finding the casket to which the little key adapted itself; although it was carefully placed behind a bonnet-box and a case of silver forks. the casket was of sweet-scented wood, and the initials j.c. were inlaid upon the lid in gold and platinum. j.c., justin cornélis--so, it had belonged to my father. i tried the key in the lock, to make quite sure that i was not mistaken. i then raised the lid, and glanced at the contents almost mechanically, supposing that i was about to find a roll of business papers, probably shares, a few trinket-cases, and rouleaux of napoleons, a small treasure in fact, hidden away from motives of fear. instead of this, i beheld several small packets carefully wrapped in paper, each being endorsed with the words, "justin's letters," and the year in which they were written. my aunt had preserved these letters with the same pious care that had kept her from allowing anything whatever belonging to him in whom the deepest affection of her life had centred, to be lost, parted with, or injured. but why had she never spoken to me of this treasure, which was more precious to me than to any one else in the world? i asked myself that question as i closed the box; then i reflected that no doubt she desired to retain the letters to the last hour of her life; and, satisfied with this explanation, i went upstairs again. from the doorway my eyes met hers, and i could not mistake their look of impatience and intense anxiety. i placed the little coffer on her bed and she instantly opened it, took out a packet of letters, then another, finally kept only one out, replaced those she had removed at first, locked the box, and signed to me to place it on the chest of drawers. while i was clearing away the things on the top of the drawers, to make a clear space for the box, i caught sight, in the glass opposite to me, of the sick woman. by a great effort she had turned herself partly on her side, and she was trying to throw the packet of letters which she had retained into the fireplace; it was on the right of her bed, and only about a yard away from the foot. but she could hardly raise herself at all, the movement of her hand was too weak, and the little parcel fell on the floor. i hastened to her, to replace her head on the pillows and her body in the middle of the bed, and then with her powerless arm she again began to make that terrible gesture of despair, clutching the sheet with her thin fingers, while tears streamed from her poor eyes.