 my aunt died at nine o'clock in the evening. i closed her eyes, and sat by her side until eleven, when julie came to me and persuaded me to go downstairs and eat something. i had taken nothing but a cup of coffee at noon. what a mournful meal was that in the dining-room, with its walls adorned with old china plates, where i had so often sat opposite to my dear aunt! a lamp stood on the table and threw a light upon the table-cloth just in front of me, but did not dispel the shadows in the room, which was warmed by a big earthenware stove, cracked by the heat. i listened to the noise of this stove, and it brought back the evenings in my childhood, when i used to roast chestnuts in the ashes of just such a fire, after i had split them, lest they should burst. i looked at julie, who insisted on waiting upon me herself, and found her drying the big tears that rolled down her wrinkled cheeks with the corner of her blue apron. i have passed hours that were more cruel, but have never known any more poignant; and i may do myself the justice to record that grief absorbed every other feeling in me at first. during the whole of that dismal night i never for an instant thought of opening the packet of letters which i had obtained by so shameful a falsehood. i had forgotten its existence, although i had taken care to pick it up and take it to my own room. where was now my curiosity to learn the secrets of those letters? i knew that i had just lost for ever the only being who had loved me entirely, and that knowledge crushed me. i wished to keep the watch by the side of the dead for part of the night, and i could not turn my gaze from that motionless face which had looked upon me for so many years with absolute and unbounded tenderness, but now lay before me with rigid features, closed lips, shut eyelids, and wearing an expression of profound sorrow such as i have never seen upon any other dead face. all the melancholy thoughts which had distilled their slow poison into her heart while she lived, were revealed by that countenance now restored to its truth. ah! that expression of infinite sadness ought to have driven me on the instant to seek for its mysterious cause in the letters which had occupied her mind to the very brink of the grave, but how could i have had strength to reason while gazing on that mournful face? i could only feel that the lips which had never spoken any words but those of tenderness to me would utter them no more, that the hands which had caressed me so tenderly would clasp mine no more for ever. the nun who was watching the dead repeated the appointed prayers, and i found myself uttering the old forms in which i no longer believed. as i recited the paternoster and the ave, i thought of all the prayers which she, who lay at rest before me, had put up to god for my peace and welfare.