the first letter, written in january, 1864, began with thanks to my aunt for her new year's gift to me--a fortress with tin soldiers--with which i was delighted, said the letter, because the cavalry were in two pieces, the man detaching himself from his horse. then, suddenly, the commonplace sentences changed into utterances of mournful tenderness. an anxious mind, a heart longing for affection, and discontent with the existing state of things, might be discerned in the tone of regret with which the brother dwelt upon his childhood, and the days when his own and his sister's life were passed together. there was a repressed repining in that first letter that immediately astonished and impressed me, for i had always believed my father and mother to have been perfectly happy with each other. alas! that repining did but grow and also take definite form as i read on. my father wrote to his sister every sunday, even when he had seen her in the course of the week. as it frequently happens in cases of regular and constant correspondence, the smallest events were recorded in minute detail, so that all our former daily life was resuscitated in my thoughts as i perused the lines, but accompanied by a commentary of melancholy which revealed irreparable division between those whom i had believed to be so closely united. again i saw my father in his dressing-gown, as he greeted me in the morning at seven o'clock, on coming out of his room to breakfast with me before i started for school at eight. he would go over my lessons with me briefly, and then we would seat ourselves at the table (without a table-cloth) in the dining-room, and julie would bring us two cups of chocolate, deliciously sweetened to my childish taste. my mother rose much later, and, after my school days, my father occupied a separate room in order to avoid waking her so early. how i enjoyed that morning meal, during which i prattled at my ease, talking of my lessons, my exercises, and my school-mates! what a delightful recollection i retained of those happy, careless, cordial hours! in his letters my father also spoke of our early breakfasts, but in a way that showed how often he was wounded by finding out from my talk that my mother took too little care of me, according to his notions--that i filled too small a place in her dreamy, wilfully frivolous life. there were passages which the then future had since turned into prophecies. "were i to be taken from him, what would become of him?" was one of these. at ten i came back from school; by that time my father would be occupied with his business. i had lessons to prepare, and i did not see him again until half-past eleven, at the second breakfast. then mamma would appear in one of those tasteful morning costumes which suited her slender and supple figure so well. from afar, and beyond the cold years of my boyhood, that family table came before me like a mirage of warm homelife; how often had it become a sort of nostalgia to me when i sat between my mother and m. termonde on my horrid half-holidays.