"unless, indeed, that----" this letter was written on the first sunday in june, 1864; and on the following thursday, four days later, he who had written it, and had suffered all it revealed, went out to the appointment at which he met with his mysterious death, that death by which his wife was set free to marry his felon friend. what was the idea, as dreadful, as infamous as the idea of which my father accused himself in his terrible last letter, that flashed across me now? i placed the packet of papers upon the mantelpiece, and pressed my two hands to my head, as though to still the tempest of cruel fancies which made it throb with fever. ah, the hideous, nameless thing! my mind got a glimpse of it only to reject it. but, had not my aunt also been assailed by the same monstrous suspicion? a number of small facts rose up in my memory, and convinced me that my father's faithful sister had been a prey to the same idea which had just laid hold of me so strongly. how many strange things i now understood, all in a moment! on that day when she told me of my mother's second marriage, and i spontaneously uttered the accursed name of termonde, why had she asked me, in a trembling voice: "what do you know?" what was it she feared that i had guessed? what dreadful information did she expect to receive from my childish observation of things? afterwards, and when she implored me to abandon the task of avenging our beloved dead, when she quoted to me the sacred words, "vengeance is mine, saith the lord," who were the guilty ones whom she foresaw i must meet on my path? when she entreated me to bear with my stepfather, even to conciliate him, not to make an enemy of him, had her advice any object except the greater ease of my daily life, or did she think danger might come to me from that quarter? when she became more afraid for me, owing to the weakening of her brain by illness, and again and again enjoined upon me to beware of going out alone in the evening, was the vision of terror that came to her that of a hand which would fain strike me in the dark--the same hand that had struck my father? when she summoned up all her strength in her last moments, that she might destroy this correspondence, what was the clue which she supposed the letters would furnish? a terrific light shone upon me; what my aunt had perceived beyond the plain purport of the letters, i too perceived. ah! i dared to entertain this idea, yet now i am ashamed to write it down. but could i have escaped from the hard logic of the situation? if my aunt had handed over those letters to the judge of instruction in the matter, would he not have arrived at the same conclusion that i drew from them? no, i could not. a man who has no known enemies is assassinated; it is alleged that robbery is not the motive of the murder; his wife has a lover, and shortly after the death of her husband she marries that lover. "but it is they--it is they who are guilty, they have killed the husband," the judge would say, and so would the first-comer. why did not my aunt place those letters of my father's in the hands of justice? i understood the reason too well; she would not have had me think of my mother what i was now in a fit of distraction thinking--that she had deceived my father, that she had been termonde's mistress, that therein lay the secret of the murder. to conceive of this as merely possible was to be guilty of moral parricide, to commit the inexpiable sin against her who had borne me. i had always loved my mother so tenderly, so mournfully; never, never had i judged her. how many times--happening to be alone with her, and not knowing how to tell her what was weighing on my heart--how many times i had dreamed that the barrier between us would not for ever divide us. some day i might, perhaps, become her only support, then she should see how precious she still was to me. my sufferings had not lessened my love for her; wretched as i was because she refused me a certain sort of affection, i did not condemn her for lavishing that affection upon another. as a matter of fact, until those fatal letters had done their work of disenchantment, of what was she guilty in my eyes? of having married again? of having chosen, being left a widow at thirty, to construct a new life for herself? what could be more legitimate? of having failed to understand the relations of the child who remained to her with the man whom she had chosen? what was more natural? she was more wife than mother, and besides, fanciful and fragile beings such as she was recoil from daily contests; they shrink from facing realities which would demand sustained courage and energy on their part. i had admitted all these explanations of my mother's attitude towards me, at first from instinct and afterwards on reflection. but now, the inexhaustible spring of indulgence for those who really hold our heart-strings was dried up in a moment, and a flood of odious, abominable suspicion overwhelmed me instead.