this sudden invasion of a horrible, torturing idea was not lasting. i could not have borne it. had it implanted itself in me then and there, definite, overwhelming in evidence, impossible of rejection, i must have taken a pistol and shot myself, to escape from agony such as i endured in the few minutes which followed my reading of the letters. but the tension was relaxed, i reflected, and my love for my mother began to strive against the horrible suggestion. to the onslaught of these execrable fancies i opposed the facts, in their certainty and completeness. i recalled the smallest particulars of that last occasion on which i saw my father and mother in each other's presence. it was at the table from which he rose to go forth and meet his murderer. but was not my mother cheerful and smiling that morning, as usual? was not jacques termonde with us at breakfast, and did he not stay on, after my father had gone out, talking with my mother while i played with my toys in the room? it was at that very time, between one and two o'clock, that the mysterious rochdale committed the crime. termonde could not be, at one and the same moment, in our salon and at the imperial hotel, any more than my mother, impressionable and emotional as i knew her to be, could have gone on talking quietly and happily, if she had known that her husband was being murdered at that very hour. why, i must have been mad to allow such a notion to present its monstrous image before my eyes for a single moment, and it was infamous of me to have gone so far beyond the most insulting of my father's suspicions. already, and without any proof excerpt the expression of jealousy acknowledged by himself to be unreasonable, i had reached a point to which the unhappy but still loving man had not dared to go, even to the extreme outrage against my mother, of believing that she had been termonde's mistress. what if, during the lifetime of her first husband, she had inspired him whom she was one day to marry with too strong a sentiment, did this prove that she had shared it? if she had shared it, would they have proved her to be a fallen woman? why should she not have entertained an affection for termonde, which, while it in no wise interfered with her fidelity to her wifely duties, made my father not-unnaturally jealous?