thus did i justify her, not only from any participation in the crime, but from any failure in her duty. and then again my ideas changed; i remembered the cry that she had uttered in presence of my father's dead body: "i am punished by god!" i was not sufficiently charitable to her to admit that those words might be merely the utterance of a refined and scrupulous mind which reproached itself even with its thoughts. i also recalled the gleaming eyes and shaking hands of termonde, when he was talking with my mother about my father's mysterious disappearance. if they were accomplices, this was a piece of acting performed before me, an innocent witness, so that they might invoke my childish testimony on occasion. these recollections once more drove me upon my fated way. the idea of a guilty tie between her and him now took possession of me, and then came swiftly the thought that they had profited by the murder, that they alone had an engrossing interest in it. so violent was the assault of suspicion that it overthrew all the barriers i had raised against it. i accumulated all the objections founded upon a physical alibi and a moral improbability, and thence i forced myself to say it was, strictly speaking, impossible they could have anything to do with the murder; impossible, impossible! i repeated this frantically; but even as it passed my lips, the hallucination returned, and struck me down. there are moments when the disordered mind is unable to quell visions which it knows to be false, when the imaginary and the real mingle in a nightmare-panic, and the judgment is powerless to distinguish between them. who is there that, having been jealous, does not know this condition of mind? what did i not suffer from it during the day after i had read those letters! i wandered about the house, incapable of attending to any duty, struck stupid by emotions which all around me attributed to grief for my aunt's death. several times i tried to sit for a while beside her bed; but the sight of her pale face, with its pinched nostrils, and its deepening expression of sadness, was unbearable to me. it renewed my miserable doubts. at four o'clock i received a telegram. it was from my mother, and announced her arrival by evening train. when the slip of blue paper was in my hand my wretchedness was for a moment relieved. she was coming. she had thought of my trouble; she was coming. that assurance dispelled my suspicions. what if she were to read my criminal thoughts in my face? but those absurd and infamous notions took possession of me once more. perhaps she thinks, so ran my thoughts, that the correspondence between my father and my aunt had not been destroyed, and she is coming in order to get hold of those letters before i see them, and to find out what my aunt said to me when she was dying. if she and termonde are guilty, they must have lived in constant dread of the old maid's penetration. ah! i had been very unhappy in my childhood, but how gladly would i have gone back to be the school-boy, meditating during the dull and interminable evening hours of study, and not the young man who walked to and fro that night in the station at compiègne, awaiting the arrival of a mother, suspected as mine was. just god! did not i expiate everything in anticipation by that one hour?