 the train from paris approached, and stopped. the railway officials called out the name of the station, as they opened the doors of the carriage one after another, very slowly it seemed to me. i went from carriage to carriage seeking my mother. had she at the last moment decided not to come! what a trial to me if it were so! what a night i should have to pass in all the torment of suspicions which, i knew too well, her mere presence would dispel. a voice called me. it was hers. then i saw her, dressed in black, and never in my life did i clasp her in my arms as i did then, utterly forgetting that we were in a public place, and why she had come, in the joy of feeling my horrible imaginations vanish, melt away at the mere touch of the being whom i loved so profoundly, the only one who was dear to me, notwithstanding our differences, in the very depths of my heart, now that i had lost my aunt louise. after that first movement, which resembled the grasp in which a drowning man seizes the swimmer who dives for him, i looked at my mother without speaking, holding both her hands. she had thrown back her veil, and in the flickering light of the station i saw that she was very pale and had been weeping. i had only to meet her eyes, which were still wet with tears, to know that i had been mad. i felt this, with the first words she uttered, telling me so tenderly of her grief, and that she had resolved to come at once, although my stepfather was ill. m. termonde had suffered of late from frequent attacks of illness. but neither her grief nor her anxiety about her husband had prevented my poor mother from providing herself, for this little excursion of a few hours, with all her customary appliances of comfort and elegance. her maid stood behind her, accompanied by a porter, and both were laden with three or four bags of different sizes, carefully buttoned up in their waterproof covers; a dressing-case, writing-case, an elegant wallet to hold the traveller's purse, handkerchief, book, and second veil; a hot-water bottle for the feet, two cushions for her head, and a little clock.