"you see," said she, while i was pointing out the carriage to the maid, so that she might get rid of her impedimenta, "i shall not have my right mourning until to-morrow "--and now i perceived that her gown was dark brown and only braided with black--"they could not have the things ready in time, but will send them as early as possible." then, as i placed her in the carriage, she added: "there is still a trunk and a bonnet-box." she half smiled in saying this, to make me smile too, for the mass of luggage and the number of small parcels with which she encumbered herself had been of old a subject of mild quarrel between us. in any other state of mind i should have been pained to find the unfailing evidence of her frivolity side by side with the mark of affection she had given me by coming. was not this one of the small causes of my great misery? true, but her frivolity was delightful to me at that moment. this then was the woman whom i had been picturing to myself as coming to the house of death, with the sinister purpose of searching my dead aunt's papers and stealing or destroying any accusing pages which she might find among them! this was the woman whom i had misrepresented to myself, that morning, as a criminal steeped in the guilt of a cowardly murder! yes! i had been mad! i had been like a runaway horse galloping after its own shadow. but what a relief to make sure that it was madness, what a blessed relief! it almost made me forget the dear dead woman. i was very sad at heart in reality, and yet i was happy, while we were rattling through the town in the old coupé, past the long lines of lighted windows. i held my mother's hand; i longed to beg her pardon, to kiss the hem of her dress, to tell her again and again that i loved and revered her. she perceived my emotion very plainly; but she attributed it to the affliction that had just befallen me, and she condoled with me. she said, "my andré," several times. how rare it was for me to have her thus, all my own, and just in that mood of feeling for which my sick heart pined!