a strange contrast existed between the tempest within my breast and the profound quiet of the house of the dead. my life glided on in apparent monotony; but in reality it was one of torment and perplexity. i rose late and took my breakfast alone, always waited on by julie. i had, however, as companions in the silent room, don juan, the watch-dog, and two half-bred angora cats, given by me to my aunt long ago, and named respectively, boule-de-poil and pierrot. i fed these creatures, each in its turn, reminding myself of robinson crusoe, the beloved hero of my childhood, and the scenes in which the solitary man is described as sitting at his table surrounded by his private menagerie. the cats hissed when don juan came near them, and if i neglected them they put out their claws and tore the table-cloth, poking their prying little noses up at me. the old clock ticked solemnly, as it had done for more years than i knew of, and there i sat, amid these homely surroundings, discussing with myself the arguments for and against my stepfather's guilt. i put the matter to myself thus: "the great objection to be made to an inquiry is the established alibi; the alibi attaches to the physical data of the crime, and in every analysis of this kind the series of moral data exists alongside of the series of physical data. if these do not coincide, there is room for doubt, and the chief care of a clever assassin is to create that doubt. if the appearance of material impossibility were to prevent investigation, how many 'instructions' would be abandoned?" when these thoughts pressed upon me too heavily, i rose and walked towards the wood. around me spread the vast silence of the afternoon in winter. the dry leaves crackled under my feet, while my mind still toiled over the argument for and against. granted that m. termonde is guilty. he was, he is still passionate to the point of violence; that is the first fact. he was madly in love with my mother; that is a second fact. my father was painfully jealous of him; that was a third fact. here begins the uncertainty! was m. termonde aware of that jealousy? had he and my father had some of those silent scenes, after which a man of the world is aware that the house of his friend, to whose wife he is making love, is about to be closed to him? this supposition would, i thought, be admitted without any difficulty. it was less easy to understand the transition from that point to the fierce longing to be rid of an obstacle which is felt to be for ever invincible; but yet the thing is possible. at this stage of my analysis, i came in contact with what i called the physical data of the crime. the false rochdale existed; this again was a fact. he had been seen by certain persons, who had also heard him speak. he was waiting in a room at the imperial hotel, while m. termonde was at our table talking with us. for m. termonde to be guilty of the crime, it would be necessary to establish a complicity between the two men; one of them, the false rochdale, must needs have been an instrument, a bravo hired to kill, for the advantage of the other.