matters had stood thus for years, and yet, after the week of miserable suspicion i had lived through, the quick look and shrug struck me strangely, even while i took his hand after i had kissed my mother, and saluted madame bernard. his hand? no, only his finger tips as usual, and they trembled a little as i touched them. how often had my own hand shrunk with unconquerable repugnance from that contact! i listened while he repeated the same phrases of sympathy with my sorrow which he had already written to me while i was at compiègne. i listened while madame bernard uttered other phrases to the same effect; and then the conversation resumed its course, and, during the half-hour that ensued, i looked on, speaking hardly at all, but mentally comparing the physiognomy of my stepfather with that of the visitor, and that of my mother. the contemplation of those three faces produced a curious impression upon me; it was that of their difference, not only of age, but of intensity, of depth. there was no mystery in my mother's face, it was as easy to read as a page in clear handwriting! the mind of madame bernard, a worldly, trumpery mind, but harmless enough, was readily to be discerned in her features, which were at once refined and commonplace. how little there was of reflection, of decision, of exercise of will, in short of individuality, behind the poetic grace of the one and the pretty affectations of the other! what a face, on the contrary, was that of my stepfather, with its strong individuality and its vivid expression! in this man of the world, as he stood there talking with two women of the world, in his blue, furtive eyes, too wide apart, and always seeming to shun observation, in his prematurely gray hair, his mouth set round with deep wrinkles, in his dark, blotched complexion, there seemed to be a creature of another race. what passions had worn those furrows? what vigils had hollowed those eyeballs? was this the face of a happy man, with whom everything had succeeded, who, having been born to wealth and of an excellent family, had married the woman he loved; who had known neither the wearing cares of ambition, the toil of money-getting, nor the stings of wounded self-love? it is true, he suffered from some complaint; but why was it that, although i had hitherto been satisfied with this answer, it now appeared to me childish and even foolish? why did all these marks of trouble and exhaustion suddenly strike me as effects of a secret cause, and why was i astonished that i had not sooner sought for it? why was it that in his presence, contrary to my expectations, contrary to what had happened about my mother, i was wrong to think thus, and harbour suspicion from which i had hoped to emerge with a free mind? why, when our eyes met for just one second, was i afraid that he might read my thoughts in my glance, and why did i shift them with a pang of shame and terror? ah! coward that i was, triple coward! either i was wrong to think thus, and at any price i must know that i was wrong; or, i was right and i must know that too. the sole resource henceforth remaining to me for the preservation of my self-respect was ardent and ceaseless search after certainty.