that such a search was beset with difficulty i was well aware. mow was i to get at facts? the very position of the problem which i had before me forbade all hope of discovering anything whatsoever by a formal inquiry. what, in fact, was the matter in question? it was to make myself certain whether m. termonde was or was not the accomplice of the man who had led my father into the trap in which he had lost his life. but i did not know that man himself; i had no data to go upon except the particulars of his disguise and the vague speculations of a judge of instruction. if i could only have consulted that judge, and availed myself of his experience? how often since have i taken out the packet containing the denunciatory letters, with the intention of showing them to him and imploring advice, support, suggestions, from him. but i have always stopped short before the door of his house; the thought of my mother barred its entrance against me. what if he, the judge of instruction in the case, were to suspect her as my aunt had done? then i would go back to my own abode, and shut myself up for hours, lying on the divan in my smoking-room and drugging my senses with tobacco. during that time i read and re-read the fatal letters, although i knew them by heart, in order to verify my first impression with the hope of dispelling it. it was, on the contrary, deepened. the only gain i obtained from my repeated perusals was the knowledge that this certainty, of which i had made a point of honour to myself, could only be psychological. in short, all my fancies started from the moral data of the crime, apart from physical data which i could not obtain. i was therefore obliged to rely entirely, absolutely, upon those moral data, and i began again to reason as i had done at compiègne. "supposing," said i to myself, "that m. termonde is guilty, what state of mind must he be in? this state of mind being once ascertained, how can i act so as to wrest some sign of his guilt from him?" as to his state of mind i had no doubt. ill and depressed as i knew him to be, his mind troubled to the point of torment, if that suffering, that gloom, that misery were accompanied by the recollection of a murder committed in the past, the man was the victim of secret remorse. the point was then to invent a plan which should give, as it were, a form to his remorse, to raise the spectre of the deed he had done roughly and suddenly before him. if guilty, it was impossible but that he would tremble; if innocent, he would not even be aware of the experiment. but how was this sudden summoning-up of his crime before the man whom i suspected to be accomplished? on the stage and in novels one confronts an assassin with the spectacle of his crime, and keeps watch upon his face for the one second during which he loses his self-possession; but in reality there is no instrument except unwieldy, unmanageable speech wherewith to probe a human conscience. i could not, however, go straight to m. termonde and say to his face: "you had my father killed!" innocent or guilty, he would have had me turned from the door as a madman!