after several hours of reflection, i came to the conclusion that only one plan was reasonable, and available: this was to have a private talk with my stepfather at a moment when he would least expect it, an interview in which all should be hints, shades, double meanings, in which each word should be like the laying of a finger upon the sorest spots in his breast, if indeed his reflections were those of a murderer. every sentence of mine must be so contrived as to force him to ask himself: "why does he say this to me if he knows nothing? he does know something. how much does he know?" so well acquainted was i with every physical trait of his, the slightest variations of his countenance, his simplest gestures, that no sign of disturbance on his part, however slight, could escape me. if i did not succeed in discovering the seat of the malady by this process, i should be convinced of the baselessness of those suspicions which were constantly springing up afresh in my mind since the death of my aunt. i would then admit the simple and probable explanation--nothing in my father's letters discredited it--that m. termonde had loved my mother without hope in the lifetime of her first husband, and had then profited by her widowhood, of which he had not even ventured to think. if, on the contrary, i observed during our interview, that he was alive to my suspicions, that he divined them, and anxiously followed my words; if i surprised that swift gleam in his eye which reveals the instinctive terror of an animal, attacked at the moment of its fancied security, if the experiment succeeded, then--then--i dared not think of what then? the mere possibility was too overwhelming. but should i have the strength to carry on such a conversation? at the mere thought of it, my heart-beats were quickened, and my nerves thrilled. what! this was the first opportunity that had been offered to me of action, of devoting myself to the task of vengeance, so coveted, so fully accepted during all my early years, and i could hesitate? happily, or unhappily, i had near me a counsellor stronger than my doubts, my father's portrait, which was hung in my smoking-room. when i awoke in the night and plunged into these thoughts, i would light my candle and go to look at the picture. how like we were to each other, my father and i, although i was more slightly built! how exactly the same we were! how near to me i felt him, and how dearly i loved him! with what emotion i studied those features, the lofty forehead, the brown eyes, the rather large mouth, the rather long chin, the mouth especially, half-hidden by a black moustache cut like my own; it had no need to open, and cry out: "andré, andré, remember me!" ah, no, my dear dead father, i could not leave you thus, without having done my utmost to avenge you, and it was only an interview to be faced, only an interview!