i entered the room--it was the same that had been mine when i was a child, but i had not been inside its door for years--in a state of mind similar to that in which i had gone to my former interview with him. i had, however, no hope now that m. termonde would be brought to his knees by my direct allusion to the hideous crime of which i imagined him to be guilty. my stepfather occupied the room as a sleeping-apartment when he was ill, ordinarily he only dressed there. the walls, hung with dark green damask, ill-lighted by one lamp, with a pink shade, placed upon a pedestal at some distance from the bed, to avoid fatigue to the sick man's eyes, had for their only ornament a likeness of my mother by bonnat, one of his first female portraits. the picture was hung between the two windows, facing the bed, so that m. termonde, when he slept in that room, might turn his last look at night and his first look in the morning upon the face whose long-descended beauty the painter had very finely rendered. no less finely had he conveyed the something half-theatrical which characterised that face, the slightly affected set of the mouth, the far-off look in the eyes, the elaborate arrangement of the hair. first, i looked at this portrait; it confronted me on entering the room; then my glance fell on my stepfather in the bed. his head, with its white hair, and his thin yellow face were supported by the large pillows, round his neck was tied a handkerchief of pale blue silk which i recognised, for i had seen it on my mother's neck, and i also recognised the red woollen coverlet that she had knitted for him; it was exactly the same as one she had made for me; a pretty bit of woman's work on which i had seen her occupied for hours, ornamented with ribbons and lined with silk. ever and always the smallest details were destined to renew that impression of a shared interest in my mother's life from which i suffered so much, and more cruelly than ever now, by reason of my suspicion. i felt that my looks must betray the tumult of such feelings, and, while i seated myself by the side of the bed, and asked my stepfather how he was, in a voice that sounded to me like that of another person, i avoided meeting his eyes. my mother had gone out immediately after announcing me, to attend to some small matters relative to the well-being of her dear invalid. my stepfather questioned me upon the ballot at the club which he had assigned as a pretext for his wish to see me. i sat with my elbow on the marble top of the table and my forehead resting in my hand; although i did not catch his eye i felt that he was studying my face, and i persisted in looking fixedly into the half-open drawer where a small pocket-pistol, of english make, lay side by side with his watch, and a brown silk purse, also made for him by my mother. what were the dark misgivings revealed by the presence of this weapon placed within reach of his hand and probably habitually placed there? did he interpret my thoughts from my steady observation? or had he, too, let his glance fall by chance upon the pistol, and was he pursuing the ideas that it suggested in order to keep up the talk it was always so difficult to maintain between us? the fact is that he said, as though replying to the question in my mind: "you are looking at that pistol, it is a pretty thing, is it not?" he took it up, turned it about in his hand, and then replaced it in the drawer, which he closed. "i have a strange fancy, quite a mania; i could not sleep unless i had a loaded pistol, there, quite close to me. after all it is a habit which does no harm to any one, and might have its advantages. if your poor father had carried a weapon like that upon him when he went to the imperial hotel, things would not have gone so easily with the assassin."