until the month of may of that year, 1879, i lived this strange life, seeing my stepfather almost every day; a prey, when he was not there, to the torments of my fancy, and when he was there suffering agonies from his presence. my field of action was restricted to the closest study of his character, and i devoted myself to the anatomy of his moral being with ardent curiosity, which was sometimes gratified and sometimes defeated, in proportion as i caught certain significant points, or failed to catch them. i observed the least of these, purposely, for they were more involuntary, less likely to deceive, and more useful in aiding my search into the innermost recesses of his nature. we rode in the bois, in the morning, several times a week, and, contrary to our usual custom, together. he came for me, or met me, without having made any appointment: we were drawn towards each other by the force of our common obsession. while we were riding side by side, talking of indifferent matters, i observed him handling his horse so roughly that several times he narrowly escaped being thrown, although he was a good horseman. he preferred restive horses, and displayed a cold ferocity in his treatment of the animals. what he did with his horses, unjust, despotic, and implacable as he was, i thought within myself he had done with life, bending all things and all persons about him to his will. he was excessively vindictive, to the point indeed of asserting that he did not attach any meaning to the word "forgiveness," and he had made for himself a place apart in the world, being little liked, much feared, and yet received by the most exclusive section of society. under the perfect elegance and correct style of his exterior, he hid the daring courage which had been proved during the war, when he had fought with great gallantry under the walls of paris. from his bearing on horseback, i arrived at far other conclusions; his innate violence convinced me that he was capable of anything to gratify his passions. in the courage which he displayed in 1870, i thought i could discern a kind of bargain made with himself, a rehabilitation of himself in his own eyes, if indeed he had committed the crime. again, i wondered whether it was merely an outcome of his innate ferocity, only a vent for the pent-up despair in which he lived, for all his outside show of happiness. but whence this despair? was it only the moral effect of his bad health? then, as i rode by his side, i set myself to examine the physiology of the man, searching for a correspondence between the construction of his frame, and the signs and tokens given in specialist books upon the subject, as those which indicate criminals; the upper part of his body was too heavy for his legs, his arms were too strongly developed, the expression of the lower jaw was hard, and his thumb too long. the latter peculiarity assumed additional importance to my mind from the fact that my stepfather had a habit of closing his hand with the thumb inwards as though to hide it. i was well aware that i must not set any real store by observations of this kind; i rejected them as puerile, but i returned to them again, in order to supplement them by others which gave value and importance to the former.