we would return, and sometimes i would go in to breakfast with my mother, or call at her hotel after my solitary meal taken in my little dining-room in the avenue montaigne. m. termonde and i were very rarely alone together during my visits to the hotel on the boulevard latour-marbourg. what did it matter to me now? if he was the criminal whom i was bent on running down, he was forewarned; i had no longer any chance of wresting his secret from him by surprise. i much preferred to study him while he was talking, and in the course of his conversation with one person or another, in my presence, i learned how perfect was his self-control. in my childhood and my early youth, i had hated that power of mastering himself completely, which he possessed to a supreme degree, while i was so foolish, so helpless a victim to my nervous sensibility, so incapable of the cold-bloodedness that hides violent emotion with the mask of calmness. now, it gave me a sort of pleasure to contemplate the depth of his hypocrisy. he had such an inveterate habit of dissimulation, such a mania for it, indeed, that he kept silence respecting the smallest events of his life, even to his wife. he never spoke of the visits he made, the people he met, the plans he formed, or the books he read. he had evidently trained himself to forecast the most remote consequences of every sentence that he uttered. this unremitting watch kept upon himself in a life apparently so easy, prosperous, and happy, could not fail to impress even the least observant people with an idea that the man was an enigmatical personage. on putting together the various pieces of his strange character and connecting his dissimulation with the passionate frenzy which i had observed in him, he appeared to me in the light of an infinitely dangerous being. he asked a great many questions, and he spoke very deliberately, very temperately, unless he were in a certain singular mood like that in which he had intoxicated himself with his own words, on the occasion of our drive in his coupé. then he would talk on and on, with a nervous, sneering laugh, and give utterance to theories so cynical, and to ideas and conceits so peculiar that the whole thing made me shudder. he had, for instance, an extraordinary knowledge of all questions relating to medical jurisprudence. a case, which made a great sensation, was tried during that winter, and in the course of an animated discussion in which several persons took part, my stepfather chanced to mention the date of the arrest of the notorious criminal conty de la pommerais. i verified the statement; it was correct. how strangely full of things connected with crime his mind must have been, and how strongly this bore upon certain data, for which i was indebted to my interviews with m. massol! for, was it not an instance of the all-absorbing, single thought which the old judge declared he had discerned in the great majority of murderers, that which leads them to return to the scene of murder, to approach the body of their victim when it is exposed in a public place, to read every line of the newspapers, in which details of their crimes are to be found, to follow the record of deeds similar to their own with eager attention? at other times, my stepfather fell into a deep silence from which it was impossible to rouse him, and he smoked cigar after cigar while the silent mood was upon him, notwithstanding the reiterated prohibition of the doctors. tobacco by day, morphine by night--what suffering was it he tried to baffle by such an abuse of narcotics? was it the pain of his malady, or torture of another kind, such as i imagined when i gave myself up to my tragic conjectures? again, he had intervals of lassitude so great that even my presence could not rouse him--the lassitude of a man who has reached the limit of what he can suffer, and who can feel no more, because he has felt too much. i found him in this condition two or three times, alone in the twilight, so utterly sunk in weariness that he took no notice of me when i seated myself opposite to him and gazed at him, also in silence. i was tempted to cry out to him: "confess, confess, confess at once!" and i should not have been surprised had he surrendered, allowed his secret to escape him, and answered: "it is true." on these occasions i felt the inanity of the small facts i had so carefully collected. what if he were not guilty? i kept silence, a prey to the fever of doubt which had been devouring me for weeks, and at last he emerged from his taciturnity to talk to me of my mother. why? was he thinking of her so intently just then because he was very ill and believed that he was on the eve of an eternal parting? or was he merely striving to defend himself against me with that buckler before which i always must retreat? was this a supplication to me to spare her a supreme grief? yes; the latter was the true explanation. with his inborn courage and his natural violence, he would not have endured the outrage of my steady immovable gaze, the menacing allusions i frequently made, the continuous threat of my presence, but for his desire to spare my mother a scene between us, at any cost, although he might be ever so sure that no solidly certain proof could spring up accidentally in the course of it. but--rather than be accused of this thing in her presence--he preferred to suffer as he was suffering. for he loved her. however intolerable that sentiment might appear to me, it was indispensable that i should admit it, even in the hypothesis of the crime, in that case above all indeed. and then i knew that notwithstanding our mutual enmity we felt ourselves obliged to act in common so as not to endanger the happiness of the being who was so dear to both of us. nevertheless, the difference between us was great. he might have a feeling of sullen jealousy because of my attachment to my mother, but it could not give him the shudder of horror that passed over me with the thought that he loved her as much as i did, and was beloved by her, and yet had my father's blood upon his conscience!