he loved her! it was for her that he had bought the assassin's hand, and caused that blood to be shed, and it was she who brought him to destruction at last, she who moved about between us with the same look of happy tenderness she had cast upon us both, on the evening when she found me by her ailing husband's bedside, and when her smile had beamed so softly upon him and me--the very same smile! the efforts he made to preserve the tranquillity of that woman's heart of hers were destined to destroy him. yes, all the precautions he had taken with a view to warding off eventualities which he thought possible, were the cause of his ultimate ruin, from the cunning disclosures he made to the gentle unsuspecting creature, even to the false affection which he pretended for me in her presence. if he and i had not made a pretence of mutual regard, she would never have spoken to me as she did speak, i should never have learned from her what i did learn, with the result that the silent duel in which my useless energies were being exhausted was brought to a sudden end. is there then an overruling fate, as certain men have believed, ay, even those who, like bonaparte, have striven most vigorously with stern realities? what i gather from the contemplation of my life, from beyond the accomplished events of it, is that there is a logical law of situation and character, which develops all the consequences of our actions even to their end, so inexorably that the very success of our criminal projects contains that which will crush us some day. when i think this out for a little while, remembering how it was she, the woman whom he so loved, who put the effectual clue for which i had ceased to hope into my hand, and that it led to the certainty from which there was no drawing back, a vertigo of terror seizes upon me, as though the awful breath of destiny swept over my brow. yes, i am terrified, because i too have blood upon my hands; but at the same time it comforts me because i can say to myself that i have but been the instrument of an inevitable deed, the necessary slave of an invisible master. poor mother! if you had known? you also were the deadly weapon in the hand of fate, blind, like the knife that kills and knows it not. whereas i--i have seen, i have known, i have willed. ah! until now i have been strong enough to keep the compact made with myself, that i would confess my story simply, detail by detail, passing no judgment on myself. and now, as the scene approaches which determined the new and last period of the drama of my life, my spirit shrinks. coward! once more i yield to a kind of stupefaction at the thought that it is really my own story i am setting down, that thus i acted, that there is in my memory----no, i have pledged my word; i will go on. yes, with this hand that holds my pen i have done the deed. yes, i have blood, blood, an indelible stain upon these fingers. they falter, but they must needs obey me and write out the story to its end.