so as to rid my judgment of every trace of personal enmity, i suppressed the names in my thoughts, reducing the dreadful occurrence by which i had suffered to the bareness of an abstract narrative. a man is desperately in love with the wife of one of his intimate friends, a woman whom he knows to be absolutely, spotlessly virtuous; he knows, he feels, that if she were free she would love him; but that, not being free, she will never, never be his. this man is of the temperament which makes criminals, his passions are violent in the extreme, he has no scruples and a despotic will; he is accustomed to see everything give way to his desires. he perceives that his friend is growing jealous; a little later and the house will no longer be open to him. would not the thought come to him--if the husband could be got rid of? and yet----? this dream of the death of him, who forms the sole obstacle to his happiness, troubles the man's head, it recurs once, twice, many times, and he turns the fatal idea over and over again in his brain until he becomes used to it. he arrives at the "if i dared," which is the starting-point of the blackest villainies. the idea takes a precise form; he conceives that he might have the man whom he now hates, and by whom he feels that he is hated, killed. has he not, far away, a wretch of a brother, whose actual existence, to say nothing of his present abode, is absolutely unknown? what an admirable instrument of murder he should find in this infamous, depraved, and needy brother, whom he holds at his beck and call by the aid in money that he sends him! and the temptation grows and grows. an hour comes when it is stronger than all besides, and the man, resolved to play this desperate game, summons his brother to paris. how? by one or two letters in which he excites the rascal's hopes of a large sum of money to be gained, at the same time that he imposes the condition of absolute secrecy as to his voyage. the other accepts; he is a social failure, a bankrupt in life, he has neither relations nor ties, he has been leading an anonymous and haphazard existence for years. the two brothers are face to face. up to that point all is logical, all is in conformity with the possible stages of a project of this order.