the remorseful moods by which i believed my stepfather to be tortured were not likely to escape the observant affection of his wife; she could not fail to know that there was a dark shadow on his life which even her love could not dispel. who knows but she had suffered from the worst of all jealousy, that which is inspired by a constant thought not imparted, a strange emotion hidden from one? and he had revealed a portion of the truth to her so as to spare her uneasiness of that kind, and to protect himself from questions which his conscience rendered intolerable to him. there was then no contradiction between this half-revelation made to my mother, and my own theory of the complicity of the two brothers. it was also clear to me that in making that revelation he had been unable to go beyond a certain point in urging upon her the necessity of silence towards me--silence which would never have been broken but for her unforeseen emotion, but for my affectionate entreaties, but for the sudden arrival of edmond termonde, which had literally bewildered the poor woman. but how was my stepfather's imprudence in refusing money to this brother, who was at bay and ready to dare any and everything, to be explained? this, too, i succeeded in explaining to myself. it had happened before my aunt's death, at a period when my stepfather believed himself to be guaranteed from all risk on my side. he believed himself to be sheltered from justice by the statute of limitation. he was ill. what, then, was more natural than that he should wish to recover those papers which might become a means of levying blackmail upon his widow after his death, and dishonouring his memory in the heart of that woman whom he had loved--even to crime--at any price? such a negotiation could only be conducted in person. my stepfather would have reflected that his brother would not fulfil his threat without making a last attempt; he would come to paris, and the accomplices would again be face to face after all these years. a fresh but final offer of money would have to be made to edmond, the price of the relinquishment of the sole proof whereby the mystery of the imperial hotel could be cleared up. in this calculation my stepfather had omitted to forecast the chance that his brother might come to the hotel on the boulevard de latour-maubourg, that he would be ushered into my mother's presence, and that the result of the shock to himself--his health being already undermined by his prolonged mental anguish--would be a fresh attack of his malady. in events, there is always the unexpected to put to rout the skilful calculations of the most astute and the most prudent, and when i reflected that so much cunning, such continual watchfulness over himself and others had all come to this--unless indeed these surmises of mine were but fallacies of a brain disturbed by fever and the consuming desire for vengeance--i once more felt the passage of the wind of destiny over us all.