morning dawned upon these thoughts of mine. i opened my window, i saw the faces of the lofty houses livid in the first light of day, and i swore solemnly to myself, in the presence of re-awakening life, that this day should see me begin to do what i ought, and the morrow should see me continue, and the following days should see the same, until i could say to myself: "i am certain." i resolutely repressed the wild feelings which had taken hold of me during the night, and i fixed my mind upon the problem: "does there exist any means of making sure whether edmond termonde is, or is not, identical with the man who in 1864 called himself rochdale?" for the answer to this question i had only myself, the resources of my own intelligence, and my personal will to rely upon. i must do myself the justice to state that not for one minute, during all those cruel hours, was i tempted to rid myself once for all of the difficulties of my tragic task by appealing to justice, as i should have done had i not taken my mother's sufferings into account. i had resolved that the terrible blow of learning that for fifteen years she had been the wife of an assassin should never be dealt to her by me. in order that she might always remain in ignorance of this story of crime, it was necessary for the struggle to be strictly confined to my stepfather and myself. and yet, i thought, what if i find that he is guilty? at this idea, no longer vague and distant, but liable to-day, to-morrow, at any time, to become an indisputable truth, a terrible project presented itself to my mind. but i would not look in that direction, i made answer to myself: "i will think of this later on," and i forced myself to concentrate all my reflections upon the actual day and its problem: how to verify the identity of edmond termonde with the false rochdale? to tear the secret from my stepfather was impossible. i had vainly endeavoured for months to find the flaw in his armour of dissimulation; i had but broken not one dagger, but twenty against the plates of that cuirass. if i had had all the tormentors of the middle ages at my service, i could not have forced his fast-shut lips to open, or extorted an admission from his woebegone and yet impenetrable face. there remained the other; but, in order to attack him, i must first discover under what name he was hiding in paris, and where. no great effort of imagination was required to hit upon a certain means of discovering these particulars. i had only to recall the circumstances under which i had learned the fact of edmond termonde's arrival in paris. for some reason or other--remembrance of a guilty complicity or fear of a scandal--my stepfather trembled with fear at the mere idea of his brother's return. his brother had returned, and my stepfather would undoubtedly make every effort to induce him to go away again. he would see him, but not at the house on the boulevard de latour-maubourg, on account of my mother and the servants. i had, therefore, a sure means of finding out where edmond termonde was living; i would have his brother followed.