my father, who was a distinguished advocate, had resigned his practice in court some years previously, and set up as a financial agent, hoping by that means to make a fortune more rapidly than by the law. his good official connection, his scrupulous probity, his extensive knowledge of the most important questions, and his great capacity for work, had speedily secured him an exceptional position. he employed ten secretaries, and the million and a half francs which my mother and i inherited formed only the beginnings of the wealth to which he aspired, partly for his own sake, much more for his son's, but, above all, for his wife's--he was passionately attached to her. notes and letters found among his papers proved that at the time of his death he had been for a month previously in correspondence with a certain person named, or calling himself, william henry rochdale, who was commissioned by the firm of crawford, in san francisco, to obtain a railway concession in cochin china, then recently conquered, from the french government. it was with rochdale that my father had the appointment of which he spoke before he left my mother, m. termonde, and myself, after breakfast, on the last fatal morning. the _instruction_ had no difficulty in establishing this fact. the appointed place of meeting was the imperial hotel, a large building, with a long façade, in the rue de rivoli, not far from the ministère de la marine. the entire block of houses was destroyed by fire in the commune; but during my childhood i frequently begged julie to take me to the spot, that i might gaze, with an aching heart, upon the handsome courtyard adorned with green shrubs, the wide, carpeted staircase, and the slab of black marble, encrusted with gold, that marked the entrance to the place whither my father wended his way, while my mother was talking with m. termonde, and i was playing in the room with them. my father had left us at a quarter-past twelve, and he must have taken a quarter of an hour to walk to the imperial hotel, for the concierge, having seen the corpse, recognised it, and remembered that it was just about half-past twelve when my father inquired of him what was the number of mr. rochdale's rooms. this gentleman had arrived on the previous day, and had fixed, after some hesitation, upon an apartment situated on the second floor, and composed of a salon and a bedroom, with a small anteroom, which separated the apartment from the landing outside. from that moment he had not gone out, and he dined the same evening and breakfasted the next morning in his salon. the concierge also remembered that rochdale came down alone, at about two o'clock on the second day; but he was too much accustomed to the continual coming and going to notice whether the visitor who arrived at half-past twelve had or had not gone away again. rochdale handed the key of his apartment to the concierge, with directions that anybody who came, wanting to see him, should be asked to wait in his salon. after this he walked away in a leisurely manner, with a business-like portfolio under his arm, smoking a cigar, and he did not reappear.