the day passed on, and towards night two housemaids entered the apartment of the foreign gentleman to prepare his bed. they passed through the salon without observing anything unusual. the traveller's luggage, composed of a large and much-used trunk and a quite new dressing-bag, were there. his dressing-things were arranged on the top of a cabinet. the next day, towards noon, the same housemaids entered the apartment, and finding that the traveller had slept out, they merely replaced the day-covering upon the bed, and paid no attention to the salon. precisely the same thing occurred in the evening; but on the following day, one of the women having come into the apartment early, and again finding everything intact, began to wonder what this meant. she searched about, and speedily discovered a body, lying at full length underneath the sofa, with the head wrapped in towels. she uttered a scream which brought other servants to the spot, and the corpse of my father was removed from the hiding-place in which the assassin had concealed it. it was not difficult to reconstruct the scene of the murder. a wound in the back of the neck indicated that the unfortunate man had been shot from behind, while seated at the table examining papers, by a person standing close beside him. the report had not been heard, on account of the proximity of the weapon, and also because of the constant noise in the street, and the position of the salon at the back of the anteroom. besides, the precautions taken by the murderer rendered it reasonable to believe that he had carefully chosen a weapon which would produce but little sound. the ball had penetrated the spinal marrow and death had been instantaneous. the assassin had placed new unmarked towels in readiness, and in these he wrapped up the head and neck of his victim, so that there were no traces of blood. he had dried his hands on a similar towel, after rinsing them with water taken from the carafe; this water he had poured back into the same bottle, which was found concealed behind the drapery of the mantelpiece. was the robbery real or pretended? my father's watch was gone, and neither his letter-case nor any paper by which his identity could be proved was found upon his body. an accidental indication led, however, to his immediate recognition. inside the pocket of his waistcoat was a little band of tape, bearing the address of the tailor's establishment. inquiry was made there, in the afternoon the sad discovery ensued, and after the necessary legal formalities, the body was brought home.