yes, our life had almost resumed its normal course when my mother's second marriage was announced to me. this time i accurately remember not only the period, but also the day and hour. i was spending my holidays with my spinster aunt, my father's sister, who lived at compiègne, in a house situated at the far end of the town. she had three servants, one of whom was my dear old julie, who had left us because my mother could not get on with her. my aunt louise was a little woman of fifty, with countrified looks and manners: she had hardly ever consented to stay two whole days in paris during my father's lifetime. her almost invariable attire was a black silk gown made at home, with just a line of white at the neck and wrists, and she always wore a very long gold chain of ancient date, which was passed under the bodice of her gown and came out at the belt. to this chain her watch and a bunch of seals and charms were attached. her cap, plainly trimmed with ribbon, was black like her dress, and the smooth bands of her hair, which was turning grey, framed a thoughtful brow and eyes so kind that she was pleasant to behold, although her nose was large and her mouth and chin were heavy. she had brought up my father in this same little town of compiègne, and had given him, out of her fortune, all that she could spare from the simple needs of her frugal life, when he wished to marry mdlle. de slane, in order to induce my mother's family to listen to his suit. the contrast between the portrait in my little album of my aunt and her face as i saw it now, told plainly enough how much she had suffered during the past two years. her hair had become more white, the lines which run from the nostrils to the corners of the mouth were deepened, her eyelids had a withered look. and yet she had never been demonstrative in her grief. i was an observant little boy, and the difference between my mother's character and that of my aunt was precisely indicated to my mind by the difference in their respective sorrow. at that time it was hard for me to understand my aunt's reserve, while i could not suspect her of want of feeling. now it is to the other sort of nature that i am unjust. my mother also had a tender heart, so tender that she did not feel able to reveal her purpose to me, and it was my aunt louise who undertook to do so. she had not consented to be present at the marriage, and m. termonde, as i afterwards learned, preferred that i should not attend on the occasion, in order, no doubt, to spare the feelings of her who was to become his wife. in spite of all her self-control, aunt louise had tears in her brown eyes when she led me to the far end of the garden, where my father had played when he was a child like myself. the golden tints of september had begun to touch the foliage of the trees. a vine spread its tendrils over the arbour in which we seated ourselves, and wasps were busy among the ripening grapes. my aunt took both my hands in hers, and began: