at these words, and without any other cause than the weakness of nerves to which i had been subject ever since my father's death, i burst into tears. the same thing happened to me sometimes when i was shut up in my room alone, with the door bolted, suffering from a dread which i could not conquer, like that of a coming danger. i would forecast the worst accidents that could happen; for example, that my mother would be murdered, like my father, and then myself, and i peered under all the articles of furniture in the room. it had occurred to me, when out walking with a servant, to imagine that the harmless man might be an accomplice of the mysterious criminal, and have it in charge to take me to him, or at all events to lose me in some unknown place. my too highly-wrought imagination overmastered me. i fancied myself, however, escaping from the deadly device, and in order to hide myself more effectually, making for compiègne. should i have enough money? then i reflected that it might be possible to sell my watch to an old watchmaker whom i used to see, when on my way to the lycée. that was a sad faculty of foresight which poisoned so many of the harmless hours of my childhood! it was the same faculty that now made me break out into choking sobs when my aunt asked me what i had in my mind against m. termonde. i related the worst of my grievances to her then, leaning my head on her shoulder, and in this one all the others were summed up. it dated from two months before. i had come back from school in a merry mood, contrary to my habit. my teacher had dismissed me with praise of my compositions and congratulations on my prizes. what good news this was to take home, and how tenderly my mother would kiss me when she heard it! i put away my books, washed my hands carefully, and flew to the salon where my mother was. i entered the room without knocking at the door, and in such haste that as i sprang towards her to throw myself into her arms, she gave a little cry. she was standing beside the mantelpiece, her face was very pale, and near her stood m. termonde. he seized me by the arm and held me back from her.