how long those nights seemed to me, when i lay down oppressed by this thought, and strove in vain to lose it in the sweet oblivion of sleep! i prayed to god for sleep, with all the strength of my childlike piety. i said mentally twelve times twelve _paters_ and _aves_--and i did not sleep. i then tried to "form a chimera;" for thus i called a strange faculty with which i knew myself to be endowed. when i was quite a little boy, on an occasion when i was suffering from toothache, i had shut my eyes, forcibly abstracted my mind, and compelled it to represent a happy scene in which i was the chief actor. thus i was enabled to overrule my sensations to the point of becoming insensible to the toothache. now, whenever i suffer, i do the same, and the device is almost always successful. i employ it in vain when my mother is in question. instead of the picture of felicity which i evoke, the other picture presents itself to me, that of the intimate life of the being whom in all the world i most love, with the man whom i most hate. for i hate him, with an implacable hatred, and without being able to assign any other motive than that he has taken the first place in the heart which was all my own. ah, me! i shall hear the slow hours struck, first from the belfry of a church hard by, and then by the school-clock--a grave and sonorous chime, then a treble ringing. i shall hear old sorbelle walk through the whole length of the dormitory, and then go into the room which he occupies at the far end. how dull is the spectacle of the two rows of our little beds, with their brass knobs shining in the dim light; and how odious it is to be listening to the snores of the sleepers! at measured intervals the watchman, an old soldier with a big face and thick black moustaches, passes. he is wrapped in a brown cloth cape, and carries a dark lantern. can it be that he is not afraid, all alone, at night, in those long passages, and on the stone staircases, where the wind rushes about with a dismal noise? how i should hate to be obliged to go down those stairs, shuddering in that darkness with the fear of meeting a ghost! i try to drive away this new idea, but in vain, and then i think. . . . where is he who killed my father? is it with fear, is it with horror that i shudder at this question? and i go on thinking. . . . does he know that i am here? panic seizes upon me, with the idea that the assassin might be capable of assuming the disguise of a school servant, for the purpose of killing me also. i commend my soul to god, and in the midst of these awful thoughts i fall asleep at length, very late, to be awakened with a start at half-past five in the morning, with an aching head, shaken nerves, and an ailing mind, sick of a disease which is beyond cure.