 three years have passed away since the autumnal evening on which a hackney-coach had set down my stepfather and myself in that corner of one of the gloomy avenues of old versailles, which is made more gloomy by the walls of the school. i was to have remained at this school for ten months only--the period of my mother's stay in italy. that evening was in the autumn of 1866; we are now in the winter of 1870, and i have been all this time imprisoned in the lycée, "where the air is so good, and i get on so well." these are the reasons assigned by my mother for not taking me back to her home. my schoolfellows pass before me in the twilight of remembrance of that distant time. rocquain, more pasty-faced than ever, with his comic-actor-like red nose, sings café-concert songs, smokes cigarettes in secret places, and collects the photographs of actresses. gervais, still brown and surly, has a passion for races, at which he is always playing, and is reconciled with leyreloup, "the hedgehog," as we call him, whom he has infected with his dangerous mania. the two are constantly arranging insect or tortoise steeple-chases. they have even contrived a betting system, and ten of us have joined in it. the game is played by placing in front of a dictionary several bits of paper with the name of a horse written upon each of them. the dictionary is then opened and shut rapidly, and the bit of paper which is blown farthest away by the little breeze thus created, is the winner, and the boys who have backed it divide the stakes. parizelle is bigger than ever; at sixteen he is already growing a beard, and has been entertained by some military acquaintances at a certain café, which he points out to us when we take our weekly walks. as for myself, i have a new friend, one joseph dediot, who has introduced me to some of the verses of de musset. we go wild over this poet. dediot's place in the schoolroom is by the side of scelles, the bookseller's son, whom we call bel-œil, because he squints. bel-œil is as lazy as a lobster, and dediot has made the oddest bargain with him. dediot does all his exercises, and in return for each, bel-œil hands over to him a copy of twenty lines of rolla. in exchange for i know not how many versions, themes, and latin verses, my friend has at last secured the entire poem, and we spout its most characteristic lines enthusiastically.