nevertheless, this shabby, dull, mean school was my home, the only place in which i felt myself really "at home," and i loved it. yes, i loved that hulks which was also partly barracks and partly hospital, because there at all events i was not perpetually confronted with the evidence of my double misfortune. after all, the influence of my age made itself felt there, the nervous strain upon me was relaxed, and i escaped from the fixed idea of the murderer of my father to be discovered, and my stepfather to be detested. my half-holidays were such misery to me that they would have made me dread the termination of my school-time, only that i knew the same date would place me in possession of my fortune, enabling me to devote myself entirely to the supreme aim and purpose of my life. i had sworn to myself that the mysterious assassin whom justice had failed to discover should be unearthed by me, and i derived extraordinary moral strength from that resolution, which i kept strictly to myself, without ever speaking of it. this, however, did not prevent me from suffering from trifles, whenever those trifles were signs of my doubly-orphaned state. how clearly present to me now are the torments of those sortie days! when the servant who was to take me to my mother's abode comes to fetch me on those sunday mornings at eight, his careless manner makes me feel that i am no longer the son of the house. this wretch, this françois niquet, with his shaven chin and his insolent eye, does not remove his hat when i come down into the parlour. sometimes, when the weather is bad, he presumes to grumble, and, although the smell of tobacco makes me sick, he lights his pipe in the railway carriage, and smokes without asking my leave. i would rather die than make any observation upon this, because i had once complained of my stepfather's valet, a vile fellow whom they made out to be in the right as against me, and i then and there resolved that never again would i expose myself to a similar affront. besides, i had already suffered too much, and thus to suffer teaches one to feel contempt. the train proceeds, and i do not exchange a dozen words with the fellow. i know that i am regarded as proud and unamiable; but the same bent of mind which made me sullen when quite a child, now makes me take a pleasure in displeasing those whom i dislike. amid silence and the reek of coarse tobacco, we reach the montparnasse station, where no carriage ever awaits me, no matter how bad the weather may be. we take the boulevard latour-maubourg, and pass by the long avenues lined with buildings, hospitals, and bric-à-brac shops, turn down by the church of saint françois xavier, cross the place des invalides, and reach the door of our hotel. i hate the concierge, also a creature of m. termonde's, and his broad flat face, in which i read hostility which is no doubt absolute indifference. but everything transforms itself into a sign of enmity, to my mind, from the faces of the servants, even to the aspect of my own room. m. termonde has taken my own dear old room from me; a large handsome room, which used to be flooded with sunshine, with a window opening on the garden, and a door communicating with my mother's apartment. i now occupy a sort of large closet, with a northern aspect and no view except that of a wood-stack. when i reach home on those sunday mornings, i have to go straight to this room and wait there until my mother has risen and can receive me. no one has taken the trouble to light a fire; so i ask for one, and while the servant is blowing at the logs, i take a chair, and gaze at the portrait of my father, which is now banished to my quarters after having figured for so long upon an easel draped with black, in my mother's morning-room. the odour of damp wood in process of kindling is mingled with the musty flavour of the room, which has been shut up all the week. i have some bitter moments to pass there. these mean miseries make me feel the moral forsakenness of my position more keenly, more cruelly. and my mother lives, she breathes at the distance of a few steps from me; yes, and she loves me!