now that i can cast a look back upon my unhappy youth, i am aware that my own temper had much to do with the misunderstanding between my poor mother and myself which has never ceased to exist. yes, she loved me, and at the same time she loved her husband. it was for me to explain to her the sort of pain she caused me by uniting and mingling those two affections in her heart. she would have understood me, she would have spared me the series of small dumb troubles that ultimately made any explanation between us impossible. when at length i saw her on those "sortie" days, at about eleven, just before breakfast, she expected me to meet her with effusive delight; how should she know that the presence of her husband paralysed me, just as it had done when we parted before her journey to italy? there was an incomprehensible mystery to her in that absolute incapacity for revealing my mind, that stony inertness which overwhelmed me so soon as we were not alone, she and i--and we were never alone. she used to come to see me at versailles once a week, on wednesday, and it hardly ever happened that she came without my stepfather. i never wrote a letter to her that she did not show to her husband; indeed, he saw every letter which she received. how well i knew this habit of hers, how she would say, "andré has written to me," and then hand to him the sheet of paper on which i could not trace one sincere, heartfelt, trustful line, because of the idea that his eyes were to rest upon it! how many notes have i torn up in which i tried to tell her the story of the troubles amid which i lived! yes, yes, i ought to have spoken to her, nevertheless, to have explained myself a little, confessed my sufferings, my wild jealousy, my brooding grief, my great need of having a corner in her thoughts for myself alone, were it only pity--but i dared not. it was in my nature to feel the pain that i must cause her by speaking thus, too strongly, and i was unable to bear it. all the various trouble of my heart then was bound up in a timid silence, in embarrassment in her presence which affected herself. like many women she was unable to understand a disposition different from her own, a manner of feeling opposed to hers. she was happy in her second marriage, she loved, she was loved. in m. termonde she had met a man to whom she had given her whole self, but she had also given to me freely, lavishly. i was her son, it seemed so natural to her that he whom she loved should also love her child. and, in fact, had not m. termonde been to me a vigilant and irreproachable protector? had he not carefully provided for every detail of my education? no doubt he had insisted upon my being sent to school as a boarder, but i had also been of his opinion as to that. he had chosen masters for me in all branches of instruction; i learned fencing, riding, dancing, music, foreign languages. he had attended to, and he continued to attend to, the smallest details, from the new year's gift that i was to receive--it was always very handsome--to the fixing of my allowance, my "week," as we called it, which was paid on each thursday, at the highest figure permitted by the rules of the lycée. never had this man, who was so imperious by nature, raised his voice in speaking to me. never once since his marriage had he varied from the most perfect politeness towards me; a woman who was in love with him would naturally see in this a proof of exquisite tact and devoted affection. put my grievances against my stepfather into words? no, i could not do it. and so i was silent, and how was my mother to explain my sullenness, the absence of any demonstrativeness on my part towards my stepfather otherwise than by my selfishness and want of feeling? she did believe me, in fact, to be a selfish and unfeeling boy, and i, owing to my unhealthy mood of mind, felt that when i was in her presence i really became what she believed me. i shrank into myself like a surly animal. but why did she not spare me those trials which completed our alienation from each other? why, when we met on those wretched sundays, did she not contrive that i should have the five minutes alone with her that would have enabled me, not to talk to her--i did not ask so much--but to embrace her, as i loved her, with all my heart? i came into the room which she had transformed into a private sitting-room--in every corner of it i had played at my free pleasure when i, the spoiled child whose lightest wish was a command, was the master--and there was m. termonde in his morning costume, smoking cigarettes and reading newspapers. it needed nothing but the rustic of the sheet in his hand, the tone of his voice as he bade me good-day, the touch of his fingers--he merely gave me their tips--and i recoiled upon myself. so strong was my antipathy that i never remember to have eaten with a good appetite at the same table with him. my wretchedness was at its height during those sunday breakfasts and dinners. ah, i hated everything about him; his blue eyes, almost too far apart, which were sometimes fixed, and at others rolled slightly in their orbits, his high prominent forehead, and prematurely grey hair, the refinement of his features, and the elegance of his manners, such a contrast with my natural dulness and lack of ease--yes, i hated all these, and even to the finely-shaped foot which was set off by his perfect boots. i think that even now, at this present hour, i should recognise a coat he had worn, among a thousand, so living a thing has a garment of his seemed to me, under the influence of that aversion. only too well did i, with my filial instinct, realise that he, with his slender graceful figure, his feline movements, his flattering voice, his native and acquired aristocratic ways, was the true husband of the lovely, highly-adorned, almost ideal creature whom i, her son, resembled as little as my poor father had resembled her. ah, how bitter was that knowledge!