out of the depths of the silence which i preserved on those wretched half-holidays, i followed with intense interest all the conversations that took place before me, especially during breakfast and dinner, in the dining-room--newly furnished, like all the rest of the house. the hours of those meals were no longer the hours of my father's time. this change, and the new furnishing of our dwelling, typified the newness of my mother's life. m. termonde, who was the son of a stockbroker, and had been for some time in diplomacy, had kept up social relations of a kind quite different from our former ones. my mother and he went frequently into that mixed and cosmopolitan society which was then, and is now, called "smart." what had become of the familiar faces at the dinners, few and far between, which my father used to give at the rue tronchet? those dinner parties consisted of three or four persons, the ladies in high gowns, and the gentlemen in morning dress. the talk was of politics and business; a former minister of king louis philippe's, who had gone back to his practice at the bar, was the oracle of the little circle; and the dinner hour was half-past six, instead of seven, on those days, because the old statesman always retired to rest at ten o'clock. in the wealthy but plain bourgeois life of our home, to go to a theatre was an event, and a ball formed an epoch. thus, at least, did things represent themselves to my childish mind. now the old ex-minister came to the house no more, nor mdme. largeyx, the engineer's widow, whom papa was always quoting to mamma as a model, and whom my mother laughingly called her "mother-in-law." now, my mother and my stepfather went out almost every evening. they had horses and several carriages, instead of the coupé hired by the month with which the wife of the renowned lawyer had been content. all the men who came in after dinner, all the women whom i met at six o'clock in my mother's drawing-room, were young and full of life and spirits, and their talk was solely of amusements; new plays, fancy balls, races, and dress. my father, who was full of the ideas of the monarchy of july, like his old political friend, used to speak severely of the imperial régime; but now, my mother was invited to the great receptions at the tuileries. how could i have ventured to talk to her about the small miseries of my school life, which seemed to me so mean when i contrasted them with her brilliant and opulent existence? formerly, when i was a day pupil at the bonaparte, i used to relate to her every trifle concerning the school and my fellow pupils; but now, i should have been ashamed to bore her with rocquain, gervais, leyreloup, and the rest. it seemed to me that she could not possibly be interested in the story of how joseph dediot had been traitorously deserted by his faithless cousin cécile; and yet, how tragic the case was, to my mind! notwithstanding that two locks of hair had been exchanged, a bouquet offered and accepted, a kiss snatched and returned, the false girl had married an apothecary at avranches. dediot had even written two poems, inspired by his misfortune, and one of them, dedicated to me, began thus: